Adaptive Compression for Fast Scans on String Columns
Yannis Foufoulas
University of Athens, Greece
Athena Research Center
johnfouf@di.uoa.gr
Lefteris Sidirourgos
University of Athens
Greece
lsidir@di.uoa.gr
Eleftherios Stamatogiannakis
University of Athens
Greece
estama@gmail.com
Yannis Ioannidis
Athena Research Center
University of Athens, Greece
yannis@di.uoa.gr
ABSTRACT
State-of-the-art OLAP systems tend to use columnar data
representations, as these are both suitable for analytics and
amenable to compression. Local dictionary value encoding
has been shown to achieve high compression rates for string
columns while still allowing fast filtered scans. In this paper,
we argue that the effectiveness and efficiency of local dic-
tionary compression is limited by data repetition across file
blocks and by dictionary look-ups inside each block during
filtered scan execution. To address this problem, we introduce
an adaptive compression technique that is based on differen-
tial dictionaries and targets both storage efficiency and query
performance. The proposed scheme reduces dramatically the
need to store repeated values across different file blocks and
significantly accelerates read operations by reducing the time
needed for dictionary look-ups. A preliminary set of exper-
iments has given very promising results, showing that, in
many cases, the proposed new dictionary compression scheme
is much more efficient than existing techniques, occasionally
up to an order of magnitude.
ACM Reference Format:
Yannis Foufoulas, Lefteris Sidirourgos, Eleftherios Stamatogian-
nakis, and Yannis Ioannidis. 2021. Adaptive Compression for Fast
Scans on String Columns. In Proceedings of the 2021 International
Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD ’21), June 20–25,
2021, Virtual Event, China. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 9 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3448016.3452798
1 INTRODUCTION
Since data volumes processed by distributed applications
are growing rapidly, new bottlenecks have emerged. One of
those regards the data transfer and processing cost. In dis-
tributed OLAP, huge amounts of data are transferred across
the execution time of analytical processing tasks. Obviously,
data movement is affected by the size of the data. So, if we
want to reduce it, it is important to reduce the size of the
data. Processing cost is usually the cost to run a scan, filtered
scan or a join and is affected by the data layout.
OLAP systems use DSM [ 14 ] or Hybrid formats [ 15 ], which
are amenable to compression and fast in scans. These formats
use a combination of compression techniques (e.g., RLE, bit
packing, byte compression like SNAPPY [ 1 ], ZSTD [ 2]). One
of the most prominent compression technique is dictionary
based compression. There are two main approaches to dic-
tionary encode an attribute: 1) local (block-level) dictionary
encoding, and 2) global (table-level) dictionary encoding. To
compare these approaches we take into account how they
perform in the following operations: i) Compression, ii) query
processing and iii) random access.
Global dictionaries reduce the size for storing the actual
values, since it does not store repeating values across the
blocks. This makes a difference in several cases, however, a
block compressed with a local dictionary might be smaller.
A local dictionary contains fewer values than a global dictio-
nary, so a value compressed with a local dictionary can be
represented by fewer number of bits or bytes. Additionally,
keeping a global dictionary may be inefficient in terms of
memory consumption when the column’s cardinality is high.
As for query processing, local and global dictionaries use
block level statistics to filter out blocks during a scan. Local
dictionaries require dictionary look-ups per block but they
scan the offsets only in the necessary blocks whereas global
dictionaries require one look-up but they scan all the offsets
unless the block is filtered out. In random access, local dic-
tionary encoding is faster since there is no need in looking
up a big global dictionary.
The block size is also an important parameter. Small blocks
lead to lower compression rate while big blocks mean higher
memory footprint and expensive random access [ 5 ]. Since com-
pression rate is very important because of network communi-
cation the increased block size (usually more than 256MB)
is mostly selected [5, 6, 10].
In this work, we introduce adaptive dictionary compression
which balances between local and global encoding, exploits
the benefits of both methods and achieves high compres-
sion rates while storing small pages. Our method is inspired
Figure 1: Different dictionary formats
by video compression with I and P frames [ 31]. In video
compression, I frames are the least compressible but do not
require other video frames to decode. P frames use data from
previous frames to decompress and are more compressible
than I frames. Similarly, we aim at separating data blocks to
least compressible and very compressible but dependent on
previous blocks. The proposed format consists of local and
self-contained dictionaries and differential dictionaries which
contain new and different values to the previous dictionary 1.
This method reduces the storage of repeating values across
blocks, thus leading to higher compression rates. Figure 1
presents an example visualization of the dictionary encodings
with some string values. Encoding all blocks with differential
dictionaries can be considered as an alternative incremental
implementation of global dictionaries and involves many of its
limitations (i.e., offset size, dictionary length). So, we propose
an adaptive dictionary encoding technique which smartly se-
lects between a local and a differential dictionary, aiming at
the right balance between local and global encoding.
The main contributions of this work are the following:
∙ The differential dictionaries that lead to better stor-
age/scan efficiency than other dictionaries.
∙ The cost function that is used to select between a local
and a differential dictionary adaptively.
∙ The different implementations of the proposed method
(Dask[19], C++) that prove its validity.
2 BACKGROUND
Several compressed formats have been implemented. Record
Columnar File (RCFile) [ 22] is based on PAX [ 15], and com-
presses each column with ZLIB [ 3 ]. ORCFile [21 ] is data type
aware and uses local dictionary encoding for low-cardinality
columns and large blocks (default 250MB). ORC File stores
small indices (min/max, count, etc.) to optimize query eval-
uation. PARQUET [ 25] uses dictionary encoding per column.
In PARQUET, data are grouped in horizontal partitions
called row groups. Each row group contains a column chunk
for each column and compresses at page level.
IBM DB2 [ 17, 20, 24] uses row compression with a global
dictionary. With BLU acceleration [ 16, 34] it employs colum-
nar dictionary compression based on the frequency of the
values, so that the most frequent values are assigned the
smallest codes. SAP HANA [ 35 ] and Data Blocks [ 27] target
both OLAP and OLTP. SAP HANA implements a unified ta-
ble structure which allows both updates using a row store and
scans with a column representation compressed with sorted
1Available on GitHub: https://github.com/madgik/arcade
Figure 2: Structure of an adaptively encoded attribute
dictionary encoding per page and bit-packing. Data Blocks
[ 27] uses dictionary encoding per block and selects the appro-
priate compression with regard to the memory consumption
while also uses Positional SMAs (PSMAs) to optimise scans.
Abadi et al. [ 13 ] implemented dictionary encoding per
column. According to the attribute cardinality, they decide
whether values should be packed into 1, 2, 3, or 4 bytes for
cache performance. Indirect coding [ 29] introduces a mapping
from the stored local offsets of a block to the offsets of the
global dictionary. It is enabled when a block contains a few
distinct values so that the block size is not increased by the
storage of the map. With this mapping it keeps storing small
offsets but it requires one extra step to decode a value.
Ordered global dictionaries are efficient in range queries
as they run without decoding the values. However, creating
an order-preserving global dictionary requires the full set of
the values known a priori. Binnig et al. [ 18] introduce data
structures to support order-preserving dictionary compres-
sion. Liu et al. [ 30 ] present mostly order-preserving (MOPs)
dictionaries. They pre-allocate space based on estimated sta-
tistics to store a MOP and support range queries without
decoding the values that exist in the MOPs.
Zukowski et al. [ 37 ] proposes patched dictionary compres-
sion (PDICT). PDICT uses local dictionary encoding per
chunk and encodes only the frequent values. When the set
of the frequent values remains the same across the chunks it
reuses the dictionary. This format is mainly beneficial with
highly skewed datasets with a small set of values which are
very frequent across all the blocks of the file.
BRPFC [28] targets efficient compression on sorted string
dictionaries and Müller et al. [ 33 ] proposes a prediction
method to select the optimal among several dictionary com-
pression schemes (e.g., Huffman / Hu-Tucker Compression
[26], Bit Compression, N-grams, Front Coding [36] etc.).
3 COMPRESSION AND PROCESSING
Figure 2 depicts the structure of an adaptively compressed
attribute and an example of a differential sequence using
the same data as in Figure 1. Each attribute consists of
multiple differential sequences. Each sequence consists of a
locally encoded page and N pages encoded with differential
dictionaries. Each page contains the values, the offsets, small
aggregates like SMAs [ 32 ] and metadata (i.e., dictionary
length, offset size, pointers). A differential page stores only
the newly added values in a sorted list and its min/max values. 
So, with differential dictionaries the storage of the repeating
values is eliminated and the time spent for dictionary look-ups
which are sorted and smaller than local dictionaries is reduced.
The offsets are stored with integer types according to the
dictionary length. Similarly to the other formats, dictionary
encoding is disabled for high cardinality columns according to
a threshold (max rate of distinct values per page: 80%). Each
page contains up to 216 records so that the offsets do not
require more than 2 bytes. Maintaining small pages leads to
low memory footprint and better cache performance, which
is crucial specifically in the case of complex tasks with several
writers getting involved. The same number of records is also
proposed by Data Blocks [ 27 ] while ORCFile proposes a large
stripe size (250MB) and a memory manager [ 23] to reduce the
stripe size when the memory is limited. However, each stripe
includes much smaller dictionary encoded row index strides
(10000 records). The footer of a differential sequence contains
pointers to each page, row counts, and a list containing the
maximum offset for each page in sequence. An attribute may
consists only of locally encoded pages or of just one local
dictionary and all the rest encoded differentially. Employing
only local dictionaries suffers from two main limitations:
∙ Look-ups take place in each block during the execution
of a query while in case of global dictionaries this
happens just once but on a bigger dictionary.
∙ Elimination of duplicate values is applied within a
block so values are repeated across different blocks.
Adaptive encoding balances between local and global en-
codings combining the benefits of both techniques. The pre-
sented encoding is called "adaptive" because it selects between
a local or a differential dictionary at compression time ac-
cording to a cost function. The cost function (section 3.1)
adapts to the characteristics of the attribute and decides
how many pages will be encoded with differential dictionaries
in each sequence. So, it is possible that the cost function
may select only local dictionaries across all the pages of the
attribute (e.g., when there are almost no repeating values
across the pages), or simulate global dictionaries (e.g., when
the total count of distinct values is small enough) by using
only differential dictionaries. An attribute encoded with adap-
tive dictionaries is splittable at the end of a sequence. This
is analogous to other formats (e.g., Parquet, ORC) which
are splittable at the end of a row group. Since differential
sequences are variable sized, to support parallelism, the com-
pressed file consists of partitions with a user-defined size
(e.g., 1GB) where each partition is encoded with adaptive
dictionaries and contains multiple differential sequences.
The format allows compression on its sorted dictionaries or
offsets using codecs like ZLIB [ 3 ], RLE/Bit-Packing Hybrid
or techniques like [ 28] and [ 33] mentioned in background
section. Moreover, techniques like PDICT [ 37] or BLU Accel-
eration [ 34] differ from the one proposed in several aspects:
1) PDICT does not encode the rare values in a chunk. How-
ever, rare values in one chunk may become more frequent in
subsequent chunks. Our technique does not make such a local
decision but encodes all values and reuses offsets throughout.
2) PDICT and BLU Acceleration require samples and fre-
quency histograms, while the proposed technique adapts at
compression time to the current distribution and compresses
passing over the data once. 3) PDICT encodes only the fre-
quent values and BLU Acceleration sorts the dictionary by
frequency to assign small codes to the most frequent values,
thus they are more effective for highly skewed datasets, while
the proposed technique adapts on all types of distributions
(as shown in the experiment section). 4) PDICT is based on
local dictionaries, with the occasional reuse of one in the next
chunk in specific cases of highly skewed datasets (e.g., if they
share the same set of frequent values), and BLU Acceleration
is based on global dictionaries. In contrast, our cost function
dynamically balances between local and global dictionaries
storing the differences and using offsets from previous dic-
tionaries for close to optimal compression. With adaptive
dictionary encoding, the compressed file will be smaller than
techniques using local and global dictionary encoding since:
∙ The duplicates across pages are reduced.
∙ The size of offsets is equal to that of a local dictionary
unless the cost function predicts that longer offsets
lead to higher compression, and smaller than that of a
global dictionary, which captures all values in file.
3.1 Selection between differential and local
The selection between a differential and local dictionary is
the most important step of the proposed technique. The
obvious metric is to maintain the offsets size as small as
possible. So, when the number of new added values requires
increasing the offsets’ size, a local dictionary is used so that
the offsets remain small. However, when the values length
is big, the increase of the offsets’ size may be preferable.
Given this, the selection between a differential and a local
dictionary should depend on the comparison of the required
page size if it is locally or differentially encoded. However,
the selection between a differential or a local dictionary also
affects the next pages. A differential dictionary that comes
after a local uses smaller offsets but it usually contains more
values than a differential dictionary that comes after another
differential dictionary. So, to make an optimal selection we
have to consider what will happen in the next pages.
Figure 3 presents an example of 6 pages and what happens
if a local or a differential dictionary is selected when the offset
size increases. If the algorithm selects to store a differential
dictionary, the current page is stored using less space, but
the next pages require cumulatevily more space.
In order to deal with these issues, the algorithm selects
between a differential and a local dictionary, using knowledge
obtained from the previous sequence to predict what will
happen in the next pages. We use every time the last sequence
of dictionaries so that we adapt to changes that may happen
over time to the statistical properties of the attribute.
Equation 1 shows how the statistics from previous pages
are utilized to select the appropriate encoding. Differential
dictionaries are preferable as they do not increase the offset
size, so the following cost function is not evaluated in each
Figure 3: Differential vs local selection
page but only when the storage of a new differential dictionary
increases the offsets’ size. When the equation is valid, a
local dictionary is stored, otherwise, the algorithm keeps on
encoding the attribute with differential dictionaries.
diffcount * (difOffsetSize − diffavg) − locOffsetSize−
(locPageSize − difPageSize) > 0 (1)
difOffsetSize ← total offsets size for a differential dictionary
locOffsetSize ← size to store the offsets of a local dictionary
diffavg ← average size of a differential dictionary
diffcount ← count of differential dictionaries in sequence
locPageSize ← page size in case of a local dictionary
difPageSize ← page size in case of a differential dictionary
This cost function considers the size of the current page if
it is local or differential and compares it with the prediction
for the next pages. The prediction is made using the size of
the differential dictionaries in the current sequence (assuming
that the case will be similar for the next sequence if we select
a local dictionary) and the required bytes to store the offsets
for a local or a differential page. Applying equation 1 on the
example in Figure 3, a local dictionary will be selected at the
fourth page. This equation targets higher compression rates
because we regard data transfer as the major bottleneck,
however, as shown in the experiments, in most cases the
smaller file also leads to faster scan/filter times.
Compression performance is important when a dataset is
compressed online and then gets processed. Compression per-
formance of differential dictionaries is mainly affected by the
calculation of distinct values and different values across the
pages. This gets bigger when each page contains many new
distinct values. The algorithm considers the following: 1) the
total size of the distinct values of the sequence. These values
are kept in memory and should not exceed the size of cache
since this could result in excessive memory consumption and
slow calculation; and 2) the ratio of new value occurrences.
Differential dictionaries are useful when there are many du-
plicate values across the pages. If during the calculation of
the new values it seems that there is small value repetition
(less than 10% by default), then the compression gains may
be insignificant compared to the required calculation time. In
this case, the algorithm stops using differential dictionaries
and stores only local ones. To adapt to changes that may
happen to the statistics, while the algorithm resorts to local
dictionaries we need to fast check whether the rate of new
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Dictionary Encoding
d i c t i o n a r i e s = {}
f o r c o l i n data_page :
v a l s = d i s t i n c t _ v a l s ( c o l )
#d i f f c o n t a i n s v a l u e s t h a t do not e x i s t
#i n any p r e v i o u s page o f t h e s e q u e n c e
d i f f = v a l s − d i c t i o n a r i e s [ c o l ]
c o s t _ f u n c t i o n ( l o c a l _ d i c t , d i f f _ d i c t )
i f l o c a l _ d i c t :
v a l s = s o r t e d ( v a l s )
d i c t i o n a r i e s [ c o l ] = v a l s
s t o r e ( v a l s )
i f d i f f _ d i c t :
d i f f = s o r t e d ( d i f f )
d i c t i o n a r i e s [ c o l ] . append ( d i f f )
s t o r e ( d i f f )
c a l c u l a t e _ a n d _ s t o r e _ t h e _ o f f s e t s ( )
values over the total values of a new page has exceeded the
threshold. We create a bloom filter for a local dictionary
encoded page and while processing the next pages we get an
approximate count of the repeating values, so that we resort
to differential dictionaries if the ratio increases.
3.2 Explanation of implemented algorithms
3.2.1 Compression. Algorithm 1 shows the main steps of
the proposed adaptive dictionary encoding. The algorithm
maintains a dictionary that contains a list for each column
in the table. When a new differentially encoded page is
processed its values are sorted and appended to the end of
the dictionary. When the cost function selects to store a local
dictionary, the dictionary is not updated any more, but it is
initialized with the sorted values of the current page.
3.2.2 Full Scan/Decompression. The full scan of a local dic-
tionary is quite simple. For each page, the algorithm scans
the offsets and replaces them with the actual values stored
in the dictionaries. In case of differential dictionaries, the
algorithm i) appends the list containing the new additional
values to the previous list, ii) scans the offsets and replaces
them with the actual values, and iii) reconstructs the rows.
3.2.3 Filtered Scan. The algorithm scans with filter, as shown
in Algorithm 2. For each page, if the requested attribute is
locally encoded the min and max value of the attribute are
checked and the page is omitted if possible. Otherwise, the
algorithm searches the sorted list of values and the offset of
the requested value is returned if it exists. In case of a differ-
ential dictionary, if the value was already found in a previous
page its offset is retrieved after checking the min/max value
(this offset is stored in ‘valid_offsets’ dictionary in Algorithm
2). Otherwise, the differential min/max values are checked
to omit the whole page before the sorted differential list is
searched. If the value exists, its offset is retrieved and then
the offsets are scanned to get the row identifiers. Contrary
to compression, during the scan we do not need to keep and
Algorithm 2 Equi Filtered Scan
c u r _ o f f s e t s , v a l i d _ o f f s e t s = { } , {}
f o r c o l i n data_page :
i f l o c a l _ d i c t :
d i c t = r e a d _ d i c t ( c o l )
c u r _ o f f s e t s [ c o l ] = l e n ( d i c t )
i f minmax ( c o l ) :
v a l i d _ o f f s e t s = s e a r c h ( d i c t )
i f v a l i d _ o f f s e t [ c o l ] :
o f f s e t s = r e a d _ o f f s e t s ( c o l )
row_ids = s c a n _ o f f s e t s ( )
i f d i f f e r e n t i a l _ d i c t :
i f v a l i d _ o f f s e t s [ c o l ] :
i f minmax ( c o l ) :
o f f s e t s = r e a d _ o f f s e t s ( c o l )
row_ids = s c a n _ o f f s e t s ( )
e l s e :
d i c t = r e a d _ d i c t ( c o l )
i f diff_minmax ( c o l ) :
v a l i d _ o f f s e t s [ c o l ] =
s e a r c h ( d i c t )+ c u r _ o f f s e t s [ c o l ]
c u r _ o f f s e t s [ c o l ] += l e n ( d i c t )
i f v a l i d _ o f f s e t s [ c o l ] :
o f f s e t s = r e a d _ o f f s e t s ( c o l )
row_ids = s c a n _ o f f s e t s ( )
update the whole global dictionary. We just need to keep the
last offset from the previous page. This method reduces the
time needed for dictionary look-ups for the following reasons:
∙ Differential dictionaries are shorter (or even empty in
many cases) than the local ones, so the time needed
for dictionary look-ups is reduced.
∙ Differential dictionaries benefit from their tighter min/
max and omit more pages in their entirety, compared
with local and global dictionaries.
∙ Unlike global dictionaries, in an equi-filter, when the
value is found in one page’s dictionary, the next dictio-
naries in the sequence are entirely skipped and offsets
are scanned directly. Similarly, offsets’ scan is avoided
until the first occurrence of the value in the sequence.
3.2.4 Page omittance. Using additional min/max values cal-
culated over the new values of a differential page, we reduce
significantly the false positives compared to zone maps, thus
more pages are omitted. If a value is not found previously,
then checking the tighter min/max values of the differential
dictionary is enough. Adaptive dictionaries also avoid offsets
scan until the first occurrence of the searched value in each
sequence, whereas in global dictionaries if the value exists
in the global dictionary all offsets are scanned (except when
omitting a page using zone maps).
Differential min/max statistics require accessing the dictio-
nary of a page and when the value is not found then check the
differential min/max of the next page. Usually, zone-maps
are stored in separate files for faster page skipping and used
Figure 4: Combination of zone maps and differential min/max
to identify the candidate pages. When a page with a differ-
ential dictionary is identified, either it contains the value in
its dictionary or it gets the value’s offset from a previous
dictionary which was also not omitted. While searching the
dictionaries of identified pages, differential min/max statis-
tics are used ignoring the omitted pages in between. Figure
4 depicts how differential min/max statistics work combined
with zone maps. The example file consists of 4 pages, in each
page we present the raw values, the new values that con-
sist the differential dictionary, and the differential min/max.
Zone-maps are stored separately. When searching for value 6,
we omit pages 2 and 3 using the zone maps. Then, we look
up the dictionary of the first page and since the value is not
found, we look up the differential min/max of page 4 and
omit the page. Since value 6 was not found in the dictionary
of the first page, it should exist in the new added values
of the current page, so we can use the tighter differential
min/max instead of the zone map.
3.2.5 Random access. Random data accesses run in a fixed
number of steps. Independently of the number of differential
dictionaries in sequence, we always need to read up to 2
pages to decode a random row. The first page contains the
corresponding row to get the offset. Its header contains a
list with the size of each previous dictionary in the sequence.
Empty previous dictionaries are not included in this list for
storage efficiency. Given that during the encoding phase a
new differential dictionary is "appended" (and not merged)
to the previous, the offset and the dictionary sizes are enough
to calculate and access directly the second page with the
differential dictionary that contains the offset’s value.
4 EXPERIMENTS
We implemented adaptive dictionaries and other dictionary
formats in C++ and Python to compare with their perfor-
mance. The Python implementation has also been integrated
within Dask’s Parquet [ 4 ] so that we compare scan queries
with Parquet and its enhanced version with adaptive dic-
tionaries. We ran experiments to examine time and space
efficiency of adaptive dictionary encoding. We experiment
with local, adaptive, global, and indirect coding. We run
experiments on EDGAR Log File Dataset [ 7 ], TPC-DS [ 11],
Microsoft Academic Graph [ 8 ], Yelp [12 ], OpenAIRE [ 9 ]. The
experiments ran on an Intel Core i7-4790 processor with a
500GB SSD and 16GB RAM, running Ubuntu Server 18.04
LTS.
4.1 Experiments with various data distributions
For this experiment, we created synthetic data based on
Microsoft Academic Graph. We created tables with affiliation
names that follow zipfian distributions with various skewness
parameter 𝜃. A smaller 𝜃 means that the distribution is less
skewed, so when 𝜃 = 0, we have uniform distribution. The
affiliation names contain on average 30 characters and the size
of the attribute is 4.7GB when 𝜃 = 0. For each distribution,
we ran experiments with sorted and randomly ordered values.
We compare C++ implementations of local, adaptive,
global dictionaries and indirect coding in terms of storage,
scanning cost and random access. Global dictionaries are un-
sorted and implemented incrementally, so that even if their
length is bigger than 216 they store offsets with 1 or 2 bytes
until the dictionary length exceeds the thresholds of 28 or
216. The queries ran in cold caches.
The first experiment regards the compression time, rate
and the full scan/materialization of a table that consists of
120 million rows with 70K affiliation names. Figures 5 (a)
and (b) present the results. The chart shows full size and
dictionaries size (in transparent color). In most cases with
global and adaptive, dictionaries size is negligible. As shown,
with randomly ordered values and a small 𝜃, local dictionaries
compress worse than global encoding. This happens because
global and adaptive encoding avoid storing repeating values,
and given an average length of 30 bytes per value, value repe-
titions are more important than offsets size. In case of larger
𝜃, there are many pages with a few distinct values, thus there
are many pages in which the offsets size is smaller and local
dictionary encoding performs better. Adaptive dictionaries
perform even better than that, striking the balance between
the value repetition and the size of the offsets. As shown
when 𝜃 = 1.3, adaptive dictionaries use some more space
for dictionaries to reduce offsets size and total size. Indirect
coding achieves high compression rates (i.e., for 𝜃 = 1.3 it is
a little worse than adaptive) but the creation of the mapping
between local and global offsets leads to higher encoding
time. Local and adaptive differential dictionary encoding
perform better with sorted values. Each page contains less
distinct values, so fewer bytes are used to store the offsets.
The adaptive encoding uses mainly local dictionaries.
As for the full scan efficiency, adaptive dictionaries perform
similarly or better than the other encodings depending on
the data distribution. To evaluate filtered scan efficiency we
executed a query that scans the affiliation attribute with
a random value. The searched value exists 227 times when
𝜃=1.3, 2200 times when 𝜃=0.7, and 1670 times with 𝜃=0. The
results are shown in Figure 5 (a). Local encoding performs
better when the values are sorted while global dictionaries are
more efficient with randomly ordered values. Our adaptive
format performs well with all distributions. It is faster than
local in randomly ordered values because dictionary lookups
are fewer and differential dictionaries are smaller than local.
It is faster than global in highly skewed data and in sorted
data since it reduces I/O and it is also faster than indirect
coding which requires an extra step to decode each value.
format total I/O offset scan dict look up
adaptive 418 57 48
global 800 62 0.036
local 1017 7.4 270
indirect 488 60 163
Table 1: Partial execution times for filtered scan
Table 1 shows the partial execution times in milliseconds for
the randomly ordered skewed distribution. Global encoding
requires more time for reading the offsets (it reads the dictio-
nary in 14msecs). It accesses all the offsets (which are bigger
than in adaptive encoding) while adaptive encoding reads
the offsets only when the value is found in a dictionary of
the sequence. Local encoding suffers from I/O and dictionary
look ups but it is fast at offsets scan since this happens only
after local dictionary look-up. Indirect coding requires more
time for look-ups than global because of the mappings. It
also requires a little more I/O than adaptive since it is a little
bigger and it also reads all the offsets. While indirect coding is
compatible with the proposed format, the overheads that the
offsets mapping introduce both in encoding and processing
time makes it not an ideal selection.
To evaluate random access queries, we selected randomly
10 row numbers, and run point queries. Figure 6 contains the
average execution times. The main overhead in random access
queries is the cost to load and access the dictionary. Global
encoding contain one big dictionary so it is inefficient in
random access queries. Indirect coding has the extra overhead
of looking up the mapping for indirect coded pages but in
case of a single random access this is exactly one small lookup
and it increases the execution time less than 1 msec.
Comparing local and adaptive dictionaries in terms of ran-
dom access several cases occurred: i) If the page in adaptive
encoding is encoded locally, random access time is same to
local dictionaries. ii) If the page is differentially encoded and
the value exists in the dictionary current dictionary, adaptive
dictionaries are faster because differential dictionaries are
smaller than the local ones. iii) If the value exists in the
local dictionary of the sequence, adaptive encoding has the
overhead of one more disk access. iv) If the value exists in
a previous differential dictionary, the overhead of the disk
access is usually overcome by the loading of a differential dic-
tionary which is smaller than a local, thus adaptive encoding
may be faster than local in these cases.
For instance, in the uniform distribution when we access
a row in the 15th page, we spent 19msecs to I/O with local
dictionaries. This contains the access to the offsets and the
local dictionary (I/O and deserialization of 43K values). With
differential dictionaries, we access the offsets in the 15th page
and encounter 3 cases: i) The offset exists in the differential
dictionary of the third page (7K values). The I/O and dese-
rialization time in this case is 8msecs. ii) The offset exists in
the differential dictionary of the first page (43K values). The
I/O time in this case was 26msecs and includes reading the
page header, the offsets, the list with 15 short integers that
contain the number of offsets in each previous page, and the
dictionary from the 1st page. Since the list with the previous
Figure 5: Storage and scan efficiency for various data distributions (70K distinct values)
Figure 6: Random access
offsets is small, the main overhead is the extra seek to the
1st page. iii) The offset exists in the differential dictionary
of the current page. This is a more rare case, in which we
are in a small differential page (∼100 values) and we do not
need to access another page so that I/O is minimal (2msecs).
As shown, the gain in second and third case is higher than
what we lose in the first case. Obviously, average random
access time depends on the distribution and how many times
a random access query is assigned to each of these cases.
4.2 Cost function evaluation
We use tables from Yelp, EDGAR Log File Dataset, TPC-DS
and MAG to evaluate the cost function. Yelp’s table contains
two attributes. The first is a string identifier of users with at
least one review and the second contains their friends. We
compress the first attribute (1.9GB) which consists of 1.6M
distinct ids. Edgar’s table contains 23.7M records with an
attribute with 78181 distinct IPs (356MB). We are using
‘sales’ table from TPC-DS in which we replace the customer’s
identifiers with their alternative string identifiers. This col-
umn contains 500K distinct ids (3.7GB). We also use the
random distribution with skewness parameter 𝜃 = 1.3 from
the previous experiment. We compare local dictionaries, full
differential dictionaries, the cost function and 3 other ways
to select between local and differential: i) Offset. A local
dictionary is stored when the offsets size increases. ii) Cumu-
lative dictionary. A local dictionary is stored when the size of
the different values in sequence exceeds a threshold (8MB).
iii) Current total. The selection is done comparing the cur-
rent total size required to store a local or a differential page.
The results are shown in Figure 7. As shown, for Yelp, the
cost function does not achieve the higher compression which
is achieved with fully differential encoding. However, since
the attribute contains 1.6M distinct values, this increases
a lot the execution time. The cost function achieves higher
compression than the other candidates while the compres-
sion time overhead is proportionally smaller. In the other
datasets, the cost function compresses more efficiently with
small time overheads. In TPC-DS, the cost function behaves
like differential encoding, in EDGAR it compresses better
than local/differential behaving the same with the other 3
alternatives, and in the synthetic dataset it achieves higher
compression than local/differential by storing local dictio-
naries when the offset size increases. For clarity purposes, in
Yelp, TPC-DS and EDGAR datasets, indirect coding does
not store mappings and behaves the same as global encoding,
which produce same sizes in similar times as fully differential.
4.3 Page omittance in EDGAR log file dataset
We used EDGAR log file to evaluate page omittance. The
table consists of 362 pages (216 records per page). Table
2 shows the results when searching for IP ‘98.6.98.djf’ (1
occurrence). The table presents total time including I/O and
scan costs, I/O times, and count of omitted pages or offset
scan with page skipping enabled or not. Zone-maps filter out
10 pages while differential min/max omit 172 pages. Local
and differential dictionaries skip offset scan when the value
does not exist in the dictionary. As shown, with naive zone-
maps the gain in I/O (skipping 10/362 pages) is small and
there is no gain in the total time whereas using additional
differential min/max the time decreases from 83 to 67 msecs.
format time I/O omit pages/offset scan
global 138 119 10/0
global/no omit 137 120 0/0
local 170 156 10/351
local/no omit 173 160 0/361
diff 67 64 172/188
diff/no omit 83 80 0/360
Table 2: Page omittance for value ‘98.6.98.djf’
Figure 7: Compression size and encoding time for different encoding strategies
Table 3 shows the results when searching for IP ‘101.81.231.jde’.
This is a value with higher selectivity, since there are 4808
occurrences. Zone maps do not omit any page, whereas dif-
ferential min/max omit 36 pages and avoid offsets scan in
293 pages after dictionary look ups.
format time I/O omit pages/offset scan
global 138 120 0/0
global/no omit 137 120 0/0
local 170 154 0/337
local/no omit 169 154 0/337
diff 81 77 36/293
diff/no omit 84 80 0/329
Table 3: Page omittance for value ‘101.81.231.jde’
4.4 Parallel Scan
We run this experiment on the OpenAIRE’s citations table
(330M citations for 31M publication DOIs). We split the table
in 100 parts stored with Dask Parquet and enhanced Parquet
(adaptive dictionaries). Finally, we ran an equi filtered scan
on each partition. We ran the same experiment with our C++
implementation of local and adaptive encoding. The results
of the slowest partition are shown in Figure 8.
As shown, the enhanced Parquet achieves faster scans in
the examined dataset. What is also shown in the results is
that the difference in scan times is much bigger when using
C++. One of the main features of differential dictionary
encoding is that it contains less string values and eliminates
string comparisons during a scan. Specifically, it replaces
string comparisons with offsets (integer) comparisons. Python
interns strings so that a string comparison is almost equal
to a pointer comparison. C++ does not do this at run time,
so by reducing the number of string comparisons the gain
is much greater. Given that, the benefit of using adaptive
dictionaries is much greater in C++ (equi filter in 20ms).
Figure 8: Parallel Scan Execution time
5 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by Horizon 2020 projects Human
Brain Project and OpenAIRE-Advance with grant agreement
numbers 945539 and 777541. The authors also thank Dr.
Harry Dimitropoulos for his helpful comments.
6 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We presented adaptive dictionaries, a compression technique
that balances between local and global dictionaries using a
cost function which adapts to changes in distribution. Using
adaptive dictionaries, both the advantages of global and local
encodings are utilized. In particular, adaptive dictionaries
are created incrementally (per page), while each dictionary
is sorted to allow efficient compression. Even if there are
too many distinct values in the table, adaptive encoding is
enabled in specific parts according to the cost function. Dif-
ferential dictionaries are smaller (or empty) than global/local
fitting better in cache and allowing fast look-ups. Adaptive
dictionaries can omit more pages during a filtered scan than
zone-maps. They avoid scanning the offsets until the first
occurrence of the value and unnecessary dictionary look-ups
if the value has already been found in a previous dictionary.
Future work concentrates on adapting the cost function
depending on the workload and execution parameters. Off-
sets compression is also in our future plans. Finally, we will
evaluate adaptive dictionaries with various page sizes.
REFERENCES
[1] https://google.github.io/snappy/. [Online; accessed 15-June-
2020].
[2] https://github.com/facebook/zstd. [Online; accessed 15-June-
2020].
[3] http://www.zlib.net/. [Online; accessed 15-June-2020].
[4] https://github.com/dask/fastparquet. [Online; accessed 15-June-
2020].
[5] 5 ways Facebook improved compression at scale with Zstandard.
https://engineering.fb.com/core-data/zstandard/. [Online; ac-
cessed 15-June-2020].
[6] Apache Parquet. https://parquet.apache.org/documentation/
latest/. [Online; accessed 15-June-2020].
[7] Edgar Log File Data. http://www.sec.gov/dera/data/Public-
EDGAR-log-file-data/2017/Qtr2/log20170630.zip. [Online; ac-
cessed 15-June-2020].
[8] Microsoft Academic Graph. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
academic-services/graph/reference-data-schema. [Online; ac-
cessed 15-June-2020].
[9] OpenAIRE API. https://api.openaire.eu. [Online; accessed 15-
June-2020].
[10] ORC Creation Best Practices. https://community.cloudera.
com/t5/Community-Articles/ORC-Creation-Best-Practices/ta-
p/248963. [Online; accessed 15-June-2020].
[11] TPC-DS dataset. http://www.tpc.org/tpcds/. [Online; accessed
15-June-2020].
[12] Yelp dataset. https://www.yelp.com/dataset/download. [Online;
accessed 15-June-2020].
[13] D. Abadi et al. Integrating compression and execution in column-
oriented database systems. In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM
SIGMOD international conference on Management of data,
pages 671–682. ACM, 2006.
[14] D. J. Abadi, P. A. Boncz, and S. Harizopoulos. Column-
oriented database systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
2(2):1664–1665, 2009.
[15] A. Ailamaki, D. J. DeWitt, et al. Weaving Relations for Cache
Performance. In Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 1,
pages 169–180, 2001.
[16] R. Barber et al. In-memory BLU acceleration in IBM’s DB2
and dashDB: Optimized for modern workloads and hardware
architectures. In Data Engineering (ICDE), 2015 IEEE 31st
International Conference on, pages 1246–1252. IEEE, 2015.
[17] B. Bhattacharjee et al. Efficient index compression in DB2 LUW.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 2(2):1462–1473, 2009.
[18] C. Binnig et al. Dictionary-based order-preserving string com-
pression for main memory column stores. In Proceedings of the
2009 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
of data, pages 283–296. ACM, 2009.
[19] R. Binns. Dask: Scalable Analytics in Python. https://dask.org.
Accessed: 2020-11-20.
[20] I. K. Center. Impact of classic table reorganiza-
tion on table-level compression dictionaries. https:
//www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/SSEPGG_
10.1.0/com.ibm.db2.luw.admin.dbobj.doc/doc/c0056502.html.
[Online; accessed 15-June-2020].
[21] A. Floratou et al. Sql-on-hadoop: Full circle back to shared-
nothing database architectures. Proceedings of the VLDB En-
dowment, 7(12):1295–1306, 2014.
[22] Y. He et al. RCFile: A fast and space-efficient data placement
structure in MapReduce-based warehouse systems. In Data Engi-
neering (ICDE), 2011 IEEE 27th International Conference on,
pages 1199–1208. IEEE, 2011.
[23] Y. Huai et al. Major technical advancements in Apache HIVE.
In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGMOD International Con-
ference on Management of data, pages 1235–1246. ACM, 2014.
[24] IBM. Optimize storage with deep compression in DB2 10.
https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/data/library/techarticle/
dm-1205db210compression/index.html. [Online; accessed
15-June-2020].
[25] J. Kestelyn. Introducing Parquet: Efficient Columnar
Storage for Apache Hadoop. Cloudera Blog (13th Mar.
2013).https://blog.cloudera.com/blog/2013/03/introducing-
parquet-columnar-storage-for-apache-hadoop/, 3, 2013.
[26] D. E. Knuth. The art of computer programming: Volume 3:
Sorting and Searching. Addison-Wesley Professional, 1998.
[27] H. Lang, T. Mühlbauer, F. Funke, P. A. Boncz, T. Neumann, and
A. Kemper. Data blocks: Hybrid oltp and olap on compressed
storage using both vectorization and compilation. In Proceedings
of the 2016 International Conference on Management of Data,
pages 311–326. ACM, 2016.
[28] R. Lasch, I. Oukid, R. Dementiev, N. May, S. S. Demirsoy, and
K.-U. Sattler. Fast & strong: The case of compressed string dictio-
naries on modern cpus. In Proceedings of the 15th International
Workshop on Data Management on New Hardware, pages 1–10,
2019.
[29] C. Lemke, K.-U. Sattler, F. Faerber, and A. Zeier. Speeding up
queries in column stores. In International Conference on Data
Warehousing and Knowledge Discovery, pages 117–129. Springer,
2010.
[30] C. Liu, M. Umbenhower, H. Jiang, P. Subramaniam, J. Ma, and
A. J. Elmore. Mostly order preserving dictionaries. In 2019 IEEE
35th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE),
pages 1214–1225. IEEE, 2019.
[31] B. M. Macq and J.-J. Quisquater. Cryptology for digital TV
broadcasting. Proceedings of the IEEE, 83(6):944–957, 1995.
[32] G. Moerkotte. Small materialized aggregates: A light weight
index structure for data warehousing. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, 1998.
[33] I. Müller, C. Ratsch, F. Faerber, et al. Adaptive string dictionary
compression in in-memory column-store database systems. In
EDBT, volume 14, pages 283–294, 2014.
[34] V. Raman et al. DB2 with BLU acceleration: So much more
than just a column store. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
6(11):1080–1091, 2013.
[35] V. Sikka et al. Efficient transaction processing in SAP HANA
database: the end of a column store myth. In Proceedings of the
2012 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
of Data, pages 731–742. ACM, 2012.
[36] I. H. Witten, A. Moffat, and T. C. Bell. Managing Gigabytes
(2nd Ed.): Compressing and Indexing Documents and Images.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999.
[37] M. Zukowski, S. Heman, N. Nes, and P. Boncz. Super-scalar
ram-cpu cache compression. In 22nd International Conference
on Data Engineering (ICDE’06), pages 59–59. IEEE, 2006.

Research Data Management Track PaperSIGMOD ’21, June 20–25, 2021, Virtual Event, China562
